Our own Gitlab Server with docker and traefik (#100)
hetzneronline/community-content: tutorials/gitlab-server-with-docker/01.en.md

---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/gitlab-server-with-docker"
slug: "gitlab-server-with-docker"
date: "2019-03-22"
title: "Our own Gitlab Server with docker and traefik"
short_description: "In this tutorial we will set up our own Gitlab server with docker. We also provide a docker image registry and use Traefik as reverse proxy."
tags: ["Git", "Gitlab", "Docker", "Image Registry", "Traefik", "Lang:YAML"]
author: "strålende IT solutions"
author_link: "https://github.com/stralende"
author_img: "https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/38130280"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: ""
---

<!-- This where the actual tutorial begins, with the title: -->

## Introduction

> In this tutorial, I show you how to set up a Gitlab CE server on a Hetzner cloud machine using docker and docker-compose. As reverse proxy and to provide a LetsEncrypt certificate we use Traefik. Also, we provide a docker image registry with Gitlab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, I show you how to set up a Gitlab CE server on a Hetzner Cloud server using docker and docker-compose. As reverse proxy and to provide a LetsEncrypt certificate we use Traefik. Also, we provide a docker image registry with Gitlab.
```

**Prerequisites**

> - A Hetzner cloud machine (I recommend at least the CX21 instance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Hetzner Cloud machine (I recommend at least the CX21 instance).
```

- A domain under which we later reach our Gitlab server and the docker image registry.
- Ubuntu 18.04 as the operating system.

## Step 1 - Preparing the cloud machine, install docker and docker-compose

To provide sufficient resources for the Gitlab server, we recommend at least the CX21. A later change to a more powerful instance is no problem. As the operating system we use Ubuntu in our case 18.04. After you have provided the instance, you connect to the machine as root.

Before we start, we update the system:

```bash
apt update && apt upgrade -y
```

Now we install docker and docker-compose first. For docker, there is a handy install script at get.docker.com.

First, we download the script using curl:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com -o get-docker.sh
```

Moreover, execute it afterward:

```bash
sh get-docker.sh
```

The installation should look like this:

![Docker installation process](images/docker_install.png)

> Now we only have to install docker-compose, for this we simply download the binary:

Reviewer: I guess I would drop the `only` here, and wrap the `docker-compose` in to inline-code.

```bash
curl -L "https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/download/1.23.2/docker-compose-$(uname -s)-$(uname -m)" -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
```

So make them executable afterward:

```bash
chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
```

> Now we can check if everything has is installed correctly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can check that everything is installed correctly:
```

```bash
docker --version
docker-compose --version
```

It should look something like this:

![check if docker correctly installed](images/docker_check.png)

That was it already at preparation, and we proceed with the next step.

## Step 2 - Create our docker-compose file

To make it easier for us to manage Gitlab and updates later on, we use docker-compose to run our docker containers.

For this we now create our `docker-compose.yaml`:

```bash
mkdir gitlab 
touch gitlab/docker-compose.yaml
vim gitlab/docker-compose.yaml
```

> > You can also use `nano` or any other text editor,  but I prefer `vim`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You can also use `nano` or any other text editor, but I prefer `vim`.
```

        gitlab_rails['smtp_enable'] = true
        gitlab_rails['smtp_address'] = "smtp.gmail.com"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_port'] = 587
        gitlab_rails['smtp_user_name'] = "gitlab@example.com"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_password'] = "xxxx"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_domain'] = "smtp.gmail.com"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_authentication'] = "login"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_enable_starttls_auto'] = true
        gitlab_rails['smtp_tls'] = false
        gitlab_rails['smtp_openssl_verify_mode'] = "peer"
    ports:
      - "2222:22"
    networks:
      - traefik_gitlab_net
      - gitlab_net
    volumes:
      - /srv/docker/volumes/gitlab/config:/etc/gitlab
      - /srv/docker/volumes/gitlab/logs:/var/log/gitlab
      - /srv/docker/volumes/gitlab/data:/var/opt/gitlab
      - /srv/docker/volumes/registry/certs:/certs
    labels:
      - "traefik.enable=true"
      - "traefik.gitlab.port=80"
      - "traefik.gitlab.backend=gitlab"
      - "traefik.gitlab.frontend.rule=Host:gitlab.example.com"      # Change host here
      - "traefik.gitlab.frontend.entryPoints=http,https"
      - "traefik.docker.network=gitlab_traefik_gitlab_net"
 
  registry:
    restart: unless-stopped

>     image: registry:2.7.1

Reviewer: You are using `latest` on the gitlab instance, why not here too? (And at traeffik too?)

Author: I changed the image tag from 2.7.1 to 2.7. To prevent braking changes, I wouldn't set it to latest, I had bad experiences with it :)

With the GitLab server this is no problem, the update process is very stable there and I also described it.

      REGISTRY_AUTH_TOKEN_SERVICE: container_registry
      REGISTRY_AUTH_TOKEN_ISSUER: gitlab-issuer
      REGISTRY_AUTH_TOKEN_ROOTCERTBUNDLE: /certs/gitlab-registry.crt
      REGISTRY_STORAGE_DELETE_ENABLED: 'true'
 
  database:
    image: postgres:10-alpine
    container_name: gitlab_database
    restart: unless-stopped
    networks:
      - gitlab_net
    environment:
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: "SAME_PASSWORD_AS_ABOVE" # use the same password as the one you used above
      POSTGRES_DB: gitlab
    volumes:
      - /srv/docker/volumes/gitlab/database:/var/lib/postgresql/data
 
  traefik:
    container_name: gitlab_traefik
    restart: unless-stopped
    image: traefik:v1.7
    command:
        --configFile=/var/traefik/traefik.toml
    ports:
      - "443:443"
      - "80:80"
      - "8090:8090"
    networks:
      - traefik_gitlab_net
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
      - ./traefik.toml:/var/traefik/traefik.toml:ro
      - /srv/docker/volumes/traefik/log:/log
 
networks:
  traefik_gitlab_net:
  gitlab_net:
```

All processed? That's it, and we can move on to the next step.

## Step 3 - Configure Traefik

> Since we use traefik as a reverse proxy, we have to create a reason configuration file for it. All other settings for traefik we define in the docker-compose.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we use traefik as a reverse proxy, we have to create a configuration file for it. All other settings for traefik we define in the `docker-compose.yaml`
```

```bash
vim gitlab/traefik.toml
```

> now we add the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we add the following content:
```

```yaml
defaultEntryPoints = ["http", "https"]
 
[entryPoints]
  [entryPoints.http]
  address = ":80"
  [entryPoints.http.redirect]
    entryPoint = "https"
  [entryPoints.https]
  address = ":443"
    [entryPoints.https.tls]
 
[acme]
email = "acme@example.com" # please change this to the email address you want to use to apply for letsencrypt certificates.
storage = "acme.json"
entryPoint = "https"
OnHostRule = true
acmeLogging = true
[acme.httpChallenge]
  entryPoint = "http"
 
## if you want you can activate an access to the traefik dashbord here. You can then access the dashboard at http://gitlab.example.com:8090
#[web]
#address = ":8090"
#[web.auth.basic]
#users = ["user:encryped_password"]
 
[docker]
endpoint = "unix:///var/run/docker.sock"
watch = true
exposedbydefault = false
```

> Don't forget to make the DNS entries for your domain. Otherwise, the certificate can't be issued in the next step (we use HTTP validation).

## Step 4 - Let's try to start the server

There's not much left. If the DNS entries point to our server, we can now continue with the following points.

> First we switch to our gitlab directory, if we are not already there:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First we switch to our Gitlab directory, if we are not already there:
```
when you want the software name `Gitlab` **or**
```suggestion
First we switch to our `gitlab` directory, if we are not already there:
```
When you want the folder name `gitlab`.

```bash
cd gitlab
```

> Let's load all docker images which we need:

Reviewer: Let's download all the docker images we need:

```bash
docker-compose pull
```

Start everything:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

> If we did everything right, the Gitlab server, the database, the docker registry, and our reverse proxy should start now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we configured everything correctly, the Gitlab server, the database, the docker registry, and our reverse proxy should start now.
```

Gitlab itself needs some time for the bootstrap process. We can check the status with `docker ps`

![docker ps check if containers are running](images/docker_ps.png)
> (health: starting) should switch to (healthy)

Don't wonder if the registry container is hanging in a restart loop; we'll get to that in Step 5.

> When everything is ready, what we need in this step, we should reach gitlab at gitlab.example.com. Now we can go to the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When everything is ready, we should reach Gitlab on gitlab.example.com. Now we can go to the next step.
```

## Step 5: Prepare the registry

> For Gitlab and our Docker Image Registry to communicate with each other, we need a shared certificate. The good thing is, gitlab creates a key for us at bootstrap, only the registry doesn't know about it yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Gitlab and our Docker Image Registry to communicate with each other, we need a shared certificate. The good thing is, Gitlab creates a key for us at bootstrap, only the registry doesn't know about it yet.
```

> What we have to do is copy the certificate key created by gitlab into the volume of the registry and create a certificate out of it. Lets do it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What we have to do is copy the certificate key created by Gitlab into the volume of the registry and create a certificate out of it. Let`s do it:
```

```
cd /srv/docker/volumes/registry/certs/
docker cp gitlab:/var/opt/gitlab/gitlab-rails/etc/gitlab-registry.key .
openssl req  -key gitlab-registry.key -new -subj "/CN=gitlab-issuer" -x509 -days 365 -out gitlab-registry.crt
```

> after a minute the docker image registry should now be running, and we can use it with gitlab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a minute the docker image registry should now be available, and we can use it with Gitlab.
```

## Conclusion

> We can now reach Gitlab at `gitlab.example.com`. At the beginning we are asked to assign a password, the default user is root. I recommend to create a new user and deactivate root after the first login.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now reach Gitlab at `gitlab.example.com`. At the beginning we are asked to assign a password, the default user is `root`. I recommend to create a new user and deactivate root after the first login.
```

---
SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
path: "/tutorials/gitlab-server-with-docker"
slug: "gitlab-server-with-docker"
date: "2019-03-22"
title: "Our own Gitlab Server with docker and traefik"
short_description: "In this tutorial we will set up our own Gitlab server with docker. We also provide a docker image registry and use Traefik as reverse proxy."
tags: ["Git", "Gitlab", "Docker", "Image Registry", "Traefik", "Lang:YAML"]
author: "strålende IT solutions"
author_link: "https://github.com/stralende"
author_img: "https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/38130280"
author_description: ""
language: "en"
available_languages: ["en"]
header_img: ""
---

<!-- This where the actual tutorial begins, with the title: -->

> # Our own Gitlab Server with docker and traefik

Reviewer 2: Please drop this line, on the website the title from the headings will be used instead.

## Introduction

In this tutorial, I show you how to set up a Gitlab CE server on a Hetzner cloud machine using docker and docker-compose. As reverse proxy and to provide a LetsEncrypt certificate we use Traefik. Also, we provide a docker image registry with Gitlab.

**Prerequisites**

- A Hetzner cloud machine (I recommend at least the CX21 instance).
- A domain under which we later reach our Gitlab server and the docker image registry.
- Ubuntu 18.04 as the operating system.

## Step 1 - Preparing the cloud machine, install docker and docker-compose

To provide sufficient resources for the Gitlab server, we recommend at least the CX21. A later change to a more powerful instance is no problem. As the operating system we use Ubuntu in our case 18.04. After you have provided the instance, you connect to the machine as root.

Before we start, we update the system:

```bash
apt update && apt upgrade -y
```

Now we install docker and docker-compose first. For docker, there is a handy install script at get.docker.com.

First, we download the script using curl:

```bash
curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com -o get-docker.sh
```

> moreover, execute it afterward:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, execute it afterward:
```

```bash
sh get-docker.sh
```

The installation should look like this:

![Docker installation process](images/docker_install.png)

Now we only have to install docker-compose, for this we simply download the binary:

```bash
curl -L "https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/download/1.23.2/docker-compose-$(uname -s)-$(uname -m)" -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
```

So make them executable afterward:

```bash
chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
```

Now we can check if everything has is installed correctly:

```bash
docker --version
docker-compose --version
```

> it should look something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It should look something like this:
```

![check if docker correctly installed](images/docker_check.png)

That was it already at preparation, and we proceed with the next step.

## Step 2 - Create our docker-compose file

To make it easier for us to manage Gitlab and updates later on, we use docker-compose to run our docker containers.

> for this we now create our `docker-compose.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this we now create our `docker-compose.yaml`:
```

```bash
mkdir gitlab 
touch gitlab/docker-compose.yaml

> vim gitlab/docker-compose.yaml

Reviewer 2: Why do you touch the file first?

Author: I don't know the behaviour of all editors, in case the file doesn't exist. Therefore, I thought it would be useful to create them before. But you are right, in the case of vim and nano it is not required.

Reviewer 2: Feel free to keep or drop, it is up to you. Just wanted to know why do you have added it.

```

> > You can also use `nano` or any other text editor,  but i prefer `vim`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> You can also use `nano` or any other text editor,  but I prefer `vim`.
```

> In our case we use local docker volumes to persist our data. for this we use the root path `/srv/docker/volumes/`. of course you can change this path as well as most other settings. Basically, most of it is self-explanatory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our case we use local docker volumes to persist our data. For this we use the root path `/srv/docker/volumes/`. Of course you can change this path as well as most other settings. Basically, most of it is self-explanatory.
```

> now we add / edit the following content:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we add / edit the following content:
```

        gitlab_rails['smtp_port'] = 587
        gitlab_rails['smtp_user_name'] = "gitlab@your-domain.com"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_password'] = "xxxx"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_domain'] = "smtp.gmail.com"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_authentication'] = "login"
        gitlab_rails['smtp_enable_starttls_auto'] = true
        gitlab_rails['smtp_tls'] = false
        gitlab_rails['smtp_openssl_verify_mode'] = "peer"
    ports:
      - "2222:22"
    networks:
      - traefik_gitlab_net
      - gitlab_net
    volumes:
      - /srv/docker/volumes/gitlab/config:/etc/gitlab
      - /srv/docker/volumes/gitlab/logs:/var/log/gitlab
      - /srv/docker/volumes/gitlab/data:/var/opt/gitlab
      - /srv/docker/volumes/registry/certs:/certs
    labels:
      - "traefik.enable=true"
      - "traefik.gitlab.port=80"
      - "traefik.gitlab.backend=gitlab"
      - "traefik.gitlab.frontend.rule=Host:gitlab.your-domain.com"      # Change host here
      - "traefik.gitlab.frontend.entryPoints=http,https"
      - "traefik.docker.network=gitlab_traefik_gitlab_net"
 
  registry:
    restart: unless-stopped
    image: registry:2.7.1
    container_name: gitlab_registry
    volumes:

>      - /mnt/HC_Volume_2108341/registry/data:/registry

Reviewer: Usage of Volume here is never described before

Author: you are absolutely right, since the data of the registry can quickly become very large, i have used a volume for my purposes. I updated the setting to use local volumes.
